And so as always, before we begin any practice, any study, any reflection, we just again connect
with our motivation and our intention of what we're doing. So we have these three essential
motivations we try to remember again and again and again, because they're the essence of
the whole great perfection teachings of the three yanas that we're all working on understanding
and realizing for the benefit of all beings. So again, just connecting with our joy, our
appreciation, how precious this moment is, how precious this life is, how precious to
have these teachings in our life, all these four thoughts that turn the mind toward the
Dharma. And then of course, expanding our vast bodhicitta impartially to all beings that,
you know, through this, this time of practicing together, as well as all the things we can
do in this life can truly be nothing but benefit for all beings as limitless as space. And
then also with great devotion, recognize and relax with the innate purity of how perfect
this moment is. And so we'll just take a moment expanding our bodhicitta, relaxing in our
joy, appreciation, devotion.
So I guess just before we begin our practice, we've been slowly just each time we meet reflecting
on different kind of reminders to help us keep fresh with our practice and also kind of reflect
on the basic the framework of all the teachings we've been given. And these nundro teachings
are of course, the essence of all Buddhist practice, all the Buddhist teachings. And
that's why they're so essential as we've heard, or maybe we haven't. But nundro means
the kind of the foundations, what really needs to be firmly established in our minds and
our hearts in order to really be a benefit for ourselves and others with a practice that's
alive. And so we, we're going to just do the practice if anyone's new to that, we'll do
that. And I think we've been kind of slowly going over the structure of the nundro, which
of course, like I just said, begins with our renunciation or our joy, our appreciation,
how precious the moment is, that's, and then bodhicitta, absolute and relative. And our
pure perception, our awe at the innate purity of all phenomena and kind of being introduced
to that view, but then how we stabilize that is what's going to make the difference. And
so within the structure of, of the nundro practice, we have, of course, just our opening
prayers. And then we've kind of gone over to some degree, the four thoughts that turn
the mind toward the Dharma, which are basically in our formal practice, as well as our informal
when we're out in the world, just trying to reflect again and again and again, on how
is it, how precious this life is, this precious human birth, and how precious and rare it
is. And also how in looking at impermanence, just again and again, reflecting on how everything's
changing, ceaselessly ceasing, never for a moment still. And then reflecting on the teachings
of Karma, of cause and effect, that all of our actions based on our perception and our
motivation have results. And those results are nothing but exponential fruition of like
that basic state of mind that our actions of body, speech and mind do. They follow us
like, they say like a bird, a shadow follows a bird. When the causes and conditions meet,
they ripen. So just the inevitability of our action, the results of our actions. And it's
our motivation that makes all the difference. And then how we meet those, of course, how
we meet what arises makes the difference for the future. And then of course, in the fourth
thought, just looking at samsara, that samsara is misunderstanding the nature as it is. And
through that misperception, we're all deluded, we're all misunderstanding. Therefore, we're
challenged. We're going against how things are. So samsara, all aspects is nothing but
challenge, is suffering, is uncomfortable. So just looking at how that's true, both according
to the great wisdom words of those who know and see, as well as what we can see in our
own lives, just looking at our own experience, observing the world. So these four outer thoughts
just beginning every practice by reflecting on these thoughts and again, bringing them
up in our mind from time to time throughout the day, just really helps us to, like Rinpoche
says, soften our mind and heart, bring some warmth and moisture to really realize what's
truly beautiful, what's really reliable, what turns our mind towards the Dharma. And so then
we started to talk a little bit more about the process of taking refuge, which is the
inner essential really profound nundro practice. And again, refuge is the gateway to all Buddhist
practice. Refuge, the essence of refuge means where have some degree of trust and confidence
in the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, and all of that is entailed and embodied within
the Buddha, within the realization of the teacher. And so we've gone over a little bit
of what is Buddha, the life of the Buddha, outer Buddha, inner Buddha, absolute Buddha,
which is also having trust and confidence in our own basic goodness and wisdom and intelligence
and capacity, natural capacity for love and compassion, the Buddha nature. Like again,
just as always a good reminder for me at least, the only difference between fully realized
Buddha and ordinary being is the degree to which we realize that. And here with our nundro
practice, Gurumpushe is always present. So both in our formal practice, we're keeping
the presence of Gurumpushe, as well as as we walk in the day, trying to feel that presence
and the all-pervading wisdom, love, compassion, teaching to awaken us into our own basic goodness
and bring out our good qualities and purify our misunderstandings and the results of actions
we've done with them using all these skillful means. And of course, our formal practice
time is a time we can really touch home base in order to really awaken and refresh with
what's natural and good and again and again and just keep going and keep going through
all the paths and stages of realization that all the different Sangha have. And so I guess
again we don't have a whole lot of time and we all have so many books at hand, you know,
from our precious teachers as well as so many other lineage masters. But just again, maybe
just for a few moments, remembering, reflecting on when we take refuge and then Dharma, what
is the Dharma? So I guess right in that and again, I know I'm not seeing anything new
and I'm sure there's people who know a lot more than I do, not to mention realize that
more than I have, but we're all here reflecting ourselves. The Dharma is so huge, so vast,
so rich, it's the nature itself expressing and turning our minds, awakening us to understanding.
So the Buddha taught according to, you know, the capacities of all beings. The Buddha is
that mind of enlightenment, the realization of the nature as it is, that great vast openness.
The Dharma is the natural expression the Buddha gave, both the teachings, the words, the
demonstrations,
the actions, the example of what the Buddha made and Guru Rinpoche made, all the great
ones have made. And so those teachings are going to every being according to their needs,
including ourselves. Like, you know, there's a beautiful in one of the sutras, I just wrote
it down, I think it's called the Lankavara Sutra, which is essentially saying, like I
said earlier, the only difference between a Buddha and ordinary sentient being is how
much one realizes Buddha has complete realization, fully awakened, completely purified, wisdom,
love, compassion. And the only difference is then the degree of misunderstanding or
delusion or not knowing that nature as it is. So the quote goes as long as there are
deluded minds, there will be no limit to the number of vehicles. Once delusion comes to
an end, there will be neither vehicles nor sentient beings. So, you know, I guess in
my own mind, one way of saying that, by here, we're talking about vehicles. That's like
what are the tools the Buddha gives us to explore the nature and to remove our, correct
our misunderstanding. Dharma, like Kimpocheung Rinpoche really emphasized, the meaning of
Dharma means to redirect and correct. So it's kind of like how in what moving how to correct
our misunderstanding of how things are and our mishandling of the nature and power of
our own mind. And so the Buddha taught again, according to the needs of all of everyone,
everywhere beings, you know. So as far as there are beings, there's that many teachings,
as many as there are negative emotions, there's teachings to help purify and uproot and transform
all of those. And of course, these were vehicle or the yanas were given, you know, as we said,
the Buddha taught, all those teachings went throughout all Asia, the light of Asia, came
to Tibet in the eighth century through the great devotion and courage of King Trisandetsen.
And then inviting Kimpo Shanta Rakshita and Guru Padmasambhava to really establish the
teachings. And something that's so beautiful about that is it embodies all the whole spectrum,
the full great wholeness of all the Buddha's teachings came to Tibet. And our practice
to this day, and that's what we've been given and what we're touching and reflecting on
and absorbing into our own mind and heart with our practice. So these vehicles, again, Lama
drop was mentioned. And of course, it's true. All the teachers, all the great ones are saying,
but the vehicle means it's something that helps us usher our mind towards realization.
That's why it's so important we relax, we allow change to happen and not be of course, it's
good to connect with the teachings, but understand that they're going to usher our mind into
realization. Because that's also the two kinds of Dharma we've all heard of, right? There's
the scripture, there's the words, there's the teachings, and then there's the realization.
So that's where it's talking about, when as the teachings, the vehicles, the yanas are
there to help us realize and awaken. And through that they kind of disappear and subsume and
then we get more. So we could again reflect on these three yanas is one basic way of looking
at what's Dharma. You know, there's the foundational teachings, which is basic again, like we said,
our renunciation, more contentment, you know, less obsession with this life. And kind of
looking at our conduct and what causes refraining from what causes more harm, more disturbance
for ourselves and others. What really looking for ourselves, what creates more peace, more
harmony for ourselves and others. And ultimately taking responsibility for our own experience
to the best of our ability, according to our capacities. It's the essence of all the teachings.
And then the basics of renunciation, contentment, less grasping, kind of look and then as far
as what the foundational teachings or Theravada, the basic teachings that the Buddha first
gave looking at the Four Noble Truths, the truth of suffering. Again, I'm glossing over
because I know many of us know these so we can reflect on the meaning quickly. And we
can look at books too, because our real point is here, we're going to practice, but I'm
just trying to refresh and reflect maybe one way of like holding Dharma. What when we're
taking refuge in the Dharma. And so the basic kind of essence of the foundational teachings
or the first turning of the teachings that the Buddha gave were these essential teachings
on kind of on the relative level that there is no self, you know, looking at Karma, how
cause and effect happen, interdependent coordination, the Four Noble Truths, all these kind of
really
essential teachings, foundational teachings of looking through our own ways we can in
our own experience kind of begin to see how, how, how we're identifying as I as our self,
what that constitutes that and begin to see how open that is and how kind of essence less
how there's no interdependent, independent me that we can really find if we really explore.
And then of course, on the philosophical level, we have like these basic, basic philosophical
views that are established in the philosophical schools of basic Buddhism of fundamental Buddhism,
where you know, kind of on the relative level, there's, there's the aggregates, there's the
elements, there's the, the ways we constitute our experience. And but we can see that they're
selfless, that we are selfless in nature. But still, that's on the relative level, but
on the absolute level. Again, according to this philosophy, this basic philosophy, kind
of according to our own capacities, then the teachings are that there's actually are kind
of substantially existing particles, like maybe in our modern science of atoms or something.
And then there's also moments of time that are substantially existing. And yet, our experiences
on a relative level, that's kind of like not seeing that absolute truth, clearly. And then
when that's investigated a little further, then philosophically speaking, it's established
how there, there's still no self. And there's also no substantially existing particles.
And there are substantially existing moments of consciousness. And of course, there's a
whole very complicated expositions on kind of how that views established. But those are
just the philosophical view and investigation of reality, that's kind of within the fun,
the foundational Buddhism. Then, of course, sometimes foundational Buddhism is called
Hinayana, which is not a derogatory term, but it means, you know, in relation to Hinayana,
the Mahayana teachings and philosophical views are greater. You know, the view is greater,
the result is greater. And of course, the real essence of the Mahayana is the teachings
on bodhichitta, of absolute bodhichitta, relative bodhichitta, the Paramita practices, the four
boundless thoughts, you know, kind of intentional bodhichitta, fruitional kind of actualizing
bodhichitta. And then also the teachings on the nature as it is, which is then this is
kind of called the second turning of the Buddhist teachings. So in the first teaching, the Buddha
is kind of establishing our ordinary kind of impure relative truth experience, ways
that we can in our experience, explore it, the reality of it, and see how it's open,
like for ourselves, not this kind of high flying, vast view, but actually engage in
a way that again, ushers us towards a clear understanding. And so then, great the Prajnaparamita
teachings, the teachings on the great emptiness, that not only is self, empty, but other,
everything
is empty. And of course, if we just read through recite and reflect on the meaning of the heart
sutra, all these teachings are right there. So on that level, the absolute truth, in one
way begins to be then that everything is mind. So the mind only or the Chitta mantra, philosophical
view is established. And then through investigating that, really led to say, well, where what
is mind? Where is mind? And then the Madhyamaka or the completely free of extremes philosophy,
sometimes called the middle way. And here middle way doesn't mean it's in the middle
means free of extremes. So then we know things are established as being free of existing,
non existing, both neither. Anyway, we look, things can be nothing holds up under analysis.
If we're really got our wits together, and look clearly, we have tools to really see
again more directly, at least intellectually, how things are empty and yet appearing, not
trying to negate anything, but really just show with the power and the gift of our intellect,
if we explore reality, there's nothing substantial to find. And then so based on this really
view of great emptiness, and then the pure and the inseparability of appearances and
emptiness is then what we have with the Vajrayana, the great unity of emptiness, and clarity
of compassion, and emptiness of wisdom and compassion, skillful means and wisdom, all
the many different words, but that inseparability of everything appearing, being pure in nature.
So that's where it starts to move into pure relative truth, because in the the Vajrayana
Dharma is where we're going right to a realized view of how everything, all that appears,
this Buddha nature is intrinsically pure. And looking to its nature helps us through
our many skillful means realize that. So I mean, this is kind of big, big view, and lots
of details. But I guess the essence of the Dharma is also one way of subsumed or kind
of categorized into three baskets, which I know we've all heard, but these three treasuries
that no matter what level on the Theravadin foundational level of the teachings, on the
Mahayana level, Vajrayana level, the three baskets are within all of those. And what
are the three baskets? So that's Vinaya Sutra Abhidharma essence of Vinaya. We've heard
is what is our conduct and morality, kind of again, looking at what's appropriate, what's
going to be appropriate and beneficial for the situations we're in, for ourselves at
our current capacities and the capacities of others being more and more attuned to that
and acting appropriately according to the situation. The essence of the Sutra is the
concentration, the teachings on concentration and the training is concentration of how to
focus, how to really not be distracted. The essence of the Abhidharma is wisdom, how things
are. So again, we're trying to not only hear the words and have lots of books and remember
lots of lists but use them as a means to really absorb in our heart and mind and have some
change for ourselves. So basically training ourselves in pure conduct, you know, of not
being less, more focused, less distracted and seeing more and more clearly things as
they are, both relatively and absolutely. That's the essence of the three baskets and
then the three trainings that we're doing with all this practice. And of course then
to the essence of all the Buddhist teachings we can all look at are what are these four
seals, right? Again, just as we're practicing, look again, just see how much we're keeping
these in our minds or exploring how is it true or even looking how is this not true.
The essence of all the Buddhist teachings, what really shows them all that everything
is impermanent. How much are we taking that to heart, just reflecting on that time to
time or seeing how it is how things are impermanent and how great that they're impermanent. Of
course we can lose things through impermanence that's because we've grasped to them that
they exist in the first place. But also if we think about through because things are
impermanent that's how we can awaken that this experience of samsara as samsara beings
it's based on impermanence. It's based on misunderstanding. That essence of the Buddhist
teachings are things aren't just impermanent. It's also all of our from our ignorance, our
attachment, our anger, jealousy, doubt, hesitation. All emotions are based in uncomfortableness.
And then how all phenomena are empty of any being substantially independent, permanent.
Everything is relying on other things to be something including ourselves and the universe
we inhabit and exist. And then the fourth seal is of course nirvana is peace or which
means beyond concepts. It's free of extremes. When we really understand things are as at
all we're we're not relying on extremes of existing, non-existing both either blah blah.
So I guess that should wrap it up but we can all do this. But as we're doing our refuge
practice really as we're standing there before Guru Padmasambhava and all the refuge tree
together in one voice with all the beings of the six realms, you know kind of reflecting
on the qualities of the Buddha, the meaning of the Buddha, what we can recall and remember
of what is the Dharma, both the teachings of the Dharma as well as you know the realization,
the view, the meditation, the conduct, the results of Dharma which are embodied in all
the Sangha. Be there other ordinary beings all aspiring and practicing engaging just
beginning on the path to those you know the Arhats, the Pratyaka Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas
you know all up through the Bhumis to all the fully enlightened Buddhas you know are
all are Sangha. So just all embodied as Guru Vipashay. So just that's all. And again the
Buddhas in all the teachings the Dharma is pointing out the nature as it is. It's just
as we go like through these yanas through these vehicles the teachings are just more
and more direct, more and more vast, more and more detailed. And so there we have it
and it's up to all of us just again through our study, through contemplation and then
through really sitting with our practice and being with it day to day through all life's
ups and downs and that's how we're transforming, that's how we're purifying, that's how we're
awakening is trying to keep awake within our experience using our formal practice but not
leaving it behind us bringing that out into the world. Good. And like Rinpoche say Ken
Shinpalden, Kenpose Wang Rinpoche the essence of Dharma is gentleness just being more calm
being more understanding, more content, less distracted, more bodhicitta even if we don't
know all these big lists and things just working with trying to do that is enough. So maybe
we'll call that it for talking so thank you for your patience and I hope that's helpful
or at least and like I've said before and I'll say again we all have heard so many teachings
and we've all been practicing we all have our own direct perception and knowledge of
the teachings and just we're all here to support each other to reflect on that and to take
those to heart and just keep going. Just like the Prajnaparamita mantra, gatte gatte paragatte
parasam gatte bodhiso ha we'll just open, open, keep opening really day in and day out
just try to go and if we fall in the ditch like Rinpoche says get up and start again
purify acknowledge our mistakes as mistakes, connect with our intention, connect with our
bodhicitta, refresh, relax, keep going through all the paths, through all the boomies till
we're fully enlightened as along the way trying to be of benefit to the best of our abilities
at least not causing any more trouble for ourselves and for the world so thank you I'll
be quiet now and we'll practice together.